Welcome to Slash Forward. In this episode, we’re
going to try real hard to cover the events that
unfold in Wes Craven’s 1991 film The People Under
the Stairs. The effort comes from the fact that
I estimate approximately 5.8 billion individual
events take place over the course of these 102
minutes. Imagine wanting to avoid an eviction
from your home while also being financially
incapable of getting your mother treatment for her
cancer. After reaching the end of your rope, and
finding yourself willing to do anything, you’re
offered the chance to improve your situation from
thin-slicing a single bean for dinner to Scrooge
McDuck-style swimming in piles of money because
you’re so flush with cash. All you have to do
is commit a simple burglary - happens every day.
Sounds like a great deal, but what if you
inadvertently stumble upon a sealed off
house of horrors owned by a couple of freaks who
give off strong sibling-spouse vibes? I mean,
as a 13-year old, I’d imagine it
would be pretty unnerving for you,
but you’d be in there with frickin Ving
Rhames! So, I don’t know, how do you think
you would stack up against Gimp Daddy? Leave a
comment to let me know and, as always, feel free
to hit the like button if you enjoy the video -
it supposedly helps out a lot. Let’s get to it.
We open on a voiceover of a tarot reading, and
things are really not looking that good. We
then transition to the recipient of the reading,
Poindexter aka Fool, attempting to relieve himself
of his ignorance and wishing he could do more to
help his sick mother. Not to pile on too much,
but he’s then surprised to find a man in
the house - Leroy, his sister Ruby’s friend,
who then sits him down to inform him that they’re
scheduled for an eviction tomorrow. You see,
they’re three days late on rent and the owners
are looking for any pretense they can use to
bounce them from the property so they can
tear it down. Leroy loves to help but,
since nothing in life comes easy, he offers
Fool the chance to earn the money he needs.
We get a little more context around this after
transitioning to the landlord and lady - Daddy,
enjoying his supper of meat and bone, and his
trad-wife Mother, who confirms through commentary
that they are looking to build some higher-rent
condominiums on their various properties.
The next morning, as Fool returns to his home
in the scummiest slum building on the block,
it becomes apparent why Leroy insists
to Ruby that bringing her young brother
under his employ is his best prospect for making
that cheddar, which is what the kids call money.
He drives this home by sneeringly remarking
not only that their mother’s cancer is easily
treatable for anyone who has the funds, but that
the target of his larcenous desires happens to be
the shitbag landlords who own the building.
You see, he happened upon a piece of mail
at the liquor store they own that had the
landlord’s home address, and the letter’s
contents expressed an interest in purchasing
the recipient's collection of golden coins.
Back at the freakhouse Mother dresses Alice,
her slave daughter, and does her best to teach
some manners. She seems to pass the exam, until
Mother notices a fork is missing. The nature of
their relationship is elucidated when mommy
wonders if she’s gonna have to smack a hoe!
But Alice gets an assist via the vent from a
strange hand. Alas, the danger has not been
fully navigated as Daddy then comes home with a
tension headache from the stress of his liquor
store being robbed. He seeks relief in the beating
of Alice while the wall occupant moans in anguish.
Meanwhile, Leroy cases the joint from the outside
and sends Fool in to get some information about
the interior. With no response up front, he
slides around to the side door. But only when
he starts messing with the landscaping does
Mother emerge… in order to slap him with an
instant rejection that she upholds even in the
face of the hard sell and bathroom request.
He reports back that they have screens and
padlocks on all windows, but he has no info on the
inside, because he couldn’t get in. Unwilling to
do a job without an appropriate amount of intel,
Spencer decides to take a crack
at sweet-talking his way in.
He suits up and approaches the house,
insisting that he has to check a meter
inside that she doesn’t even know about,
and that as a gasman, he has a legal right
to come in. This convinces her to acquiesce,
providing him the access he so richly desires.
But while he’s putting in work, we learn that
Leroy is concerned that Spence may try to use
this opportunity to cut him out of the job.
This fear is reinforced when Mother leaves by
herself shortly after, implying that Spencer is
inside the house completely alone. In a panic,
he pulls fully into the driveway to see if they
can scope out what’s going down. On the way in,
Fool has some doubts about committing his first
felony. But since he’s inside, he’s technically
already done it, so what difference does it
make now? Inside they find locks everywhere
and heavy doors. However, with just a little
effort and the appropriate angle Gross.
They are immediately attacked by a dog, and it
won’t stop no matter how much Fool begs it. They
do manage to give the good boy the slip, and
lock themselves inside for safety. As they get
their bearings, a noise from upstairs draws their
attention. It’s a very tense situation, which is
obvious from their acting. So Leroy forges ahead
on his own while Fool waits in the living room.
However, a curious noise draws Fool to the
basement door. He peers through and sees
Spencer’s clipboard. So, he unlocks
the door and goes down the stairs,
but only until he hears another strange noise
but, apparently, he kind of is, because he lets
the threat of being deemed a chickenshit -
which he imposes upon himself - compel him
to head back into the basement. He takes a look
around and mostly finds old building supplies
and sporting goods, but then he finds a tube
TV that’s still working. When a dust plume
threatens to aggravate his allergies, he turns
to leave and trips over Spencer’s dead body.
He recognizes that Spencer is gripping a gold
coin in his cold, dead hand right before something
drags him toward the wall. Fool pulls him back,
only to discover that his hand has been munched
upon. Then it dawns on him that the TV was
there for the entertainment benefit of the
people under the stairs, which is not a metaphor.
The mysterious moaner then jumps out to introduce
himself and Fool makes for the door. He is
released by Alice, who disappears into the house.
Before Fool can pursue her, Mother and Father
return so he runs upstairs to warn Leroy.
When he finds him, he’s laying in the hallway,
ass to the wind. Turns out, he’s listening very
carefully to a strange sound wafting through the
ducts. Fool warns him of the owners’ return and
Spencer’s apparent death by fear, so they run down
double quick to confirm they’re still barricaded
in before trying for the front door, which they
find to be humorously electrified. As Prince
works on busting his way in, Leroy convinces Fool
to stand out as bait so he can beat off the dog.
But, when he arrives, they learn that Prince
doesn’t like the tender meat, and when Leroy
prairie dogs to see what’s happening he gets
clamped down. Fool tries to tug him to safety,
reaching the knob and letting the
electricity flow through their bodies.
They rush back upstairs to hide,
and Leroy finds a good spot,
but just for him, and tells Fool to shove
off right before lockdown is initiated and
Daddy begins to clear the upstairs. The
wall creeper pops out, startling Leroy
into the hallway where he is shot many times,
satiating the psychopathic couple’s blood lust.
Fool creeps out and watches as
they tap dance on ya boi’s corpse,
and when he returns to the hall he’s been gifted
sight and led toward safety. Behind the vent he
essentially finds a whole second house with
a pathway out. When he emerges in an adjacent
hallway he finds Alice standing meekly in
a bathroom they hopefully no longer use.
After introductions Fool discovers she has no
knowledge of the outside world, because there’s no
way out of the house. Despite the failure of many
others like him, he is determined to escape. She
further explains that the people under the stairs
were all prospective brothers who couldn’t live
up to the standards set for them, so they were
mutilated and cast away. When the moaning starts
back up, she confirms that is Roach - a cellar
boy who escaped into the walls and is hunted by
big Daddy...mostly when his moaning interrupts
gimp time, which he takes personal offense to.
Daddy has to place a bookmark in his
progress, because police arrive at the house.
Turns out the van in their driveway was
identified as possibly being related to a
recent liquor store robbery. Fool tries
to get their attention from upstairs,
but no sound escapes. Outside they claim the van
just happened to be there when they got home,
and they saw a couple of men walking down
the street. The officers go to scope out
the rest of the neighborhood, leaving the
evidence behind and unsecured, so they help
themselves. This reveals the likely presence
of a boy in the house who smells delicious.
Inside, Prince has decided to settle
for what he can get and chases Fool
into a room where he is repelled with a falcon
punch. Daddy then tries to blast his way in,
but gets his skull caved in. Then Roach pops
out and grabs Fool before dipping out. He’s led
through the back halls with Prince in hot
pursuit. They ultimately shake their tail
by distracting him with a toy and sending him
down a chute that Roach had built in his free
time just in case. This ejects him right
out to where Mother and Daddy are located,
and the homemade plushy indicates that the
filthy little boys have gotten to Alice.
Sure enough, they do emerge in her room
where the new friends get to know each
other through intense, sustained eye contact. This
is because Roach’s bad part was his smart mouth,
so they cut out his tongue, which is why
he can’t talk good. When the parents bust
in and see what these little wall rats have
been up to, Mother lays down a final verdict
Literally as they offer Fool a quarter to help
them tidy up the place. Then they toss his ass
in as Mother supervises Alice as she cleans
up the blood while also losing her damn mind.
When she’s finished, Alice is put to bed
and informed of their intent to kill Fool.
Downstairs we find that Daddy likes it raw, but
is also incredibly wasteful. There’s still a lot
of good meat on that torso. He then sends Fool
into the pen before leaving. But, in a twist,
the people under the stairs turn out to be
superstitious ghouls - retreating at the sight of
Leroy’s apparent rebirth. Turns out it was just
Roach foolin’ on them to facilitate an escape.
Once they are safely tucked away inside the
furnace - a strange sentence to utter - Fool sees
that Roach didn’t make it out of their altercation
unscathed, and also that he has some of them
golden coins. He gives them in exchange for Fool’s
promise to help get Alice out of here, and then he
expires. Since it’s bad luck to break a promise to
a dead man, Fool begins clawing his way upstairs.
Prince’s exasperated attempts to get at him
distracts Daddy long enough for Fool to pop
out in Alice’s room and rupture his nutsack (bust
his nut) before scurrying back into the wall.
Daddy attempts to solve this problem
by using Roach to warm the house,
sending a comforting smoke billowing
softly through the ductwork. This prompts
the young escapees to bust out, which
has to be hell on the HVAC efficiency.
Then they make their way through as quietly
as possible to try to avoid getting shot.
When they hear Prince coming again,
Fool decides it’s time to take a stand
and gets into an unlikely wrestling match with a
dog that’s his own size. The noise allows Daddy
to locate them and start probing the wall with his
bayonet, which eventually finds purchase...inside
Prince’s body, but since that tactic has never
worked before, he’s too overcome with excitement
and dances a little jig for mama. But she insists
on seeing proof with her own eyes, and they lament
the results as the kids make it to the attic -
the one room in the house with an open window.
Fool suggests jumping into the
koi pond below. Alice is hesitant,
however, and this results in them
getting split up when Daddy runs in,
forcing Fool’s hand and forgetting himself in
his zeal by firing off his gun in open air.
Back at home Fool and Ruby get confirmation
that the gold is enough for both their rent
and their mom’s operation - after
they trade them in for cash.
Then the elder relays some spicy rumors
about Mother and Daddy brother and sister!?
After a bit, Fool takes a moment to make
proactive amends with his mother for what
he must do next...step outside to a payphone
to call the police and report a case of abuse.
But when the police arrive, everything is cleaned
up and there aren’t even any kids around. Plus,
the lovely owners are just so damn charming.
After the officers leave, the pair resets the
house and goes to get ready for bed. Along the way
Mother expresses concern about the police leaving
the back door open so long, risking someone
escaping. But not expecting an infiltration.
Fool selects himself a nice, hefty
bludgeon and creeps upstairs,
inching toward the sound of evening prayers.
But they were goofin’ on him. Gimp Daddy jumps
out and Fool gouges his eyes the way he likes
before blasting Mother’s uterus into her throat.
They chase him downstairs where he made like
he got away, but his intent was never to leave.
Instead he ventures up through the chimney and
releases Alice from the inside. He arranges to
meet her at the special window. Before leaving, he
informs Alice that she has no ties to her parents
as they are siblings who kidnapped her when she
was young. She reciprocates by informing Fool
that the pond has been drained and there
are now bombs wired up all over the joint.
Thinking quickly they head to the
roof and work to attract attention,
using Daddy’s eagerness to harm them as an
opportunity to brick him in the face. Then
the pair Donkey Kong’s Mother, herniating a disc
in her C6 on their way down to the basement. Fool
tells Alice how to get out from here, and circles
back to take care of some unfinished business.
On her way out, Alice is confronted.
Empowered by the truth she finds her
voice and sass-talks her mother. Convinced
the boys have despoiled their little girl,
Daddy is given the green light to
kill them all. As the search begins,
they hear someone riling the basement boys. When
he goes to check it out, he gets drawn down upon,
but manages to hit the stairslide and turn the
tables. Mother is distracted by a knock at the
door, which she answers to find Ruby there to do
an activism...but they’re really busy right now.
Now Daddy’s really going to do it, for real
this time - until the Morlocks blind him with
their flashlights. Then there’s another knock at
the door from someone claiming to be the police,
responding to reports of gunfire. But it’s
those dang activists again and this time,
they brought the whole community. Regardless,
Mother prepares to bust but is thwarted
when Alice drops in and smashes her face.
Downstairs, through some careful maneuvering, the
cast offs use Fool to unlock the coop and then
drag him in to provide unexpected protection.
While Daddy tends to another head injury,
Fool bridges the alarm on the embalming machine
to open its door and access the riches inside.
Upstairs they get all separated again so Alice
can have a showdown with Mother, and they
really work through some stuff. Unfortunately,
their closure is thwarted when the folks under
the stairs become the folks at approximately stair
level. In her panic, Mother rounds a corner and
runs right into Alice’s knife. She then becomes
a victim to her own desire to help these wayward
young men. They toss her into the basement and
when Daddy sees that they’re not in the pen,
he becomes concerned about his stash. He goes to
check the vault where Fool engages in a standoff,
daring him to make a move. When
he does, he blows him...sky high.
The money erupts out into the night air,
gently floating down to the people as the
ghouls wander off into an unknown world, in what
could be viewed as a sort of mutant Rumshpringa.
I have a lot of history with People Under
the Stairs, and also a lot of thoughts to
sort through. My first experience with
this movie occurred during a sleepover
with a friend when I was a young lad. His
older sister and her friends had rented
one of the Faces of Death films along with
this one. I remember hearing all kinds of
crazy crap coming in from the other room,
and it left a lasting impression about how
creepy and twisted this movie was despite
the fact that I didn’t actually see it.
When I did see it for the first time as an adult,
I was somewhat put off by the cornier
elements of the movie. It was not at
all what I expected. It was truly anchored by a
creeptastic performance from Mother and Daddy,
but then had a bunch of peripheral elements that
just didn’t match up with the tone, I thought.
Having watched it again, I think I have more of
an appreciation for the film, and also a better
understanding of where I think it went wrong.
There was something about the overall combination
of elements that diluted the final effect. I
think the film, overall, would have worked well
if it was creepy and humorous or cheesy while
allowing the overall theme and structure of the
story to imply the overarching message they were
trying to achieve. Coming out and directly saying
it weakens its impact and also adds a separate
layer that just doesn’t work, because the cheesy
activism clashes with the self-aware cheesiness
of the slapstick portions, if that makes sense.
Overall it felt like there was something here,
but it was presented with a degree of naivety
that you don’t expect from Wes Craven, the master
of horror. If it had more of a Last House
on the Left or The Hills Have Eyes vibe,
I think it would have worked much better. It seems
like most of my complaints fall under a single,
broader category, which is that this project
overall comes across as unpolished. I’m going
to give some examples here, but also want to
go into detail about one part in particular.
So, here are some examples of parts that didn’t
seem to fit well in terms of how everything was
laid out - the music works really well in some
areas, but is really grating and out-of-character
in others. The end credits song also really
anchors this movie to a particular time period,
dating it unnecessarily. The idea that Spencer was
scared to death? Why? Leroy laying on the floor
and ignoring Fool calling out to him, because
he was too focused on listening to the vent
was just weird. The ending back and forth also
strains suspension of disbelief. There were too
many pieces set up that had to be addressed to
get the characters into position. For instance,
there was an entire crowd of people outside,
but doing nothing to help. They also made a
point of showing how Ruby ends up outside and
cut off so they can get Alice alone with Mother,
but this completely glosses over the fact
that Grandpa Booker had been there as well,
but then disappeared. There was also some strange,
but funny ADR included throughout the movie .
Some of these elements point to something I’ve
brought up before around directors creating
believable scenarios in their movies by actually
working through it in real time without direction,
to verify if it’s plausible. I’ll illustrate
what I mean through the nut-buster scene.
We have established that the antagonists are
at the point where they just want to kill.
In this scene, Daddy is in Alice’s room all
worked up and violent. In a final attempt to
help get them out of there, Fool pops out of
the vent to physically confront Daddy. A child
runs across a room to confront a grown man who
is intent on harming him, and is able to freely
unload on his gonads without repercussion before
retreating to the other side of the room. He then
pauses here as Daddy lunges for him, but lamely
side steps, resulting in Daddy face planting into
the wall and basically taking himself out. All of
this scripted nonsense could have been avoided by
taking the time to set up the scenario and
let the actors play through it naturally
to see if it made sense. This is especially
important when you have kids taking on adults.
Another quick example is from
the ending sequence in Halloween:
Resurrection where the protagonist is
stuck in a burning shed with Michael Myers.
She would love nothing more than to get away, oh
but she has some cords and an audio mixer on her.
Nothing about this looks believable. Have
the actress try to get up, if she can do so
easily, you need to make some changes to your set
piece. If, like so many things in life, you want
her escape and rescue to rely on the presence of
a bo-staff wielding Busta Rhymes, then make it
really seem like she can’t get up unless Busta is
there to explode Michael’s sac with a live wire.
This lack of preparation along with the other
points of sloppiness I mentioned before are
what I mean by the film feeling unpolished. If
you’re not careful, things like this can take
your audience out of the moment, remove any sense
of danger and also possibly diminish the presence
of your antagonist. Just to clarify, I don't
think this necessarily makes the movie bad,
or that this is a bad movie. And there’s
a good chance the things I pointed out
imbue the movie with a nostalgic charm for
people who saw it when it first came out.
Before we go, I’d like to give a huge thanks to
my donors, memorialized in the hall of headshots.
I have a website set up where you
can support the channel through
donations or merch. Any donation unlocks
uncensored movie reviews of Lifeforce,
Under the Skin and Possessor, with others to
be added over time. If you enjoyed the video,
I’d love for you to become a part of the
channel by subscribing. Thanks for watching.